Create new Code Origins doc page (#28056)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/guide/code_origins.md

---
title: Code Origins for Spans
description: "Learn how to use Code Origins to understand where your spans originate in your codebase"
further_reading:
- link: "/tracing/glossary/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about APM terms and concepts"
- link: "/tracing/trace_collection/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn how to set up APM tracing with your application"
- link: "/tracing/services/service_page/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn more about services in Datadog"
- link: "/tracing/services/resource_page/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Dive into your resource performance and traces"
- link: "/dynamic_instrumentation/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn how to add custom spans with Dynamic Instrumentation"

---

{{< beta-callout url="#" btn_hidden="true" >}}
Code Origins is currently in Preview. To join the preview, follow the instructions below. 

To submit questions, feedback, or requests related to Code Origins, fill out <a href="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScyeRsF2GJjYdf9bUyeDjt8_9id-gvqiBU1SHR3ioDGe5eF3g/viewform?usp=header">this form</a> with details. 

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> For time-sensitive issues, contact <a href="https://www.datadoghq.com/support/">Datadog support</a>.

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
title: Code Origins for Spans

> description: "Learn how to use Code Origins to understand where your spans originate from in your codebase"

Reviewer: "from" is unnecessary here

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "Learn how to use Code Origins to understand where your spans originate in your codebase"
```

- Debug performance issues
- Understand code execution flow
- Identify performance bottlenecks
- Onboard new team members

{{< img src="tracing/guide/code_origins/code_origin_details.png" alt="Code Origin Details" style="width:100%;">}}

## Getting started

### Prerequisites
- [Datadog APM][6] configured to capture spans
- Service meets the [Compatibility Requirements](#compatibility-requirements) below
- [Source Code Integration][7] enabled (recommended for code previews)

### Compatibility requirements

| Runtime Language | Tracing Library Version | Frameworks |
|---|---|---|
| Java | `1.47.0` or later | Spring Boot/Data, gRPC servers, Micronaut 4, Kafka consumers (entry spans only)|
| Python | `2.15.0` or later | Django, Flask, Starlette and derivatives (entry spans only)|
| Node.js | `4.49.0` or later | Fastify (supports both entry & exit spans), All other [APM-supported integrations][8] (support exit spans only)|

### Enable Code Origins

Run your service with the below environment variable:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: I don't know why, but if you make it `shell` instead of `bash`, it will render with a Copy button

```suggestion
```shell
```

> # Enable/disable Code Origins
> DD_CODE_ORIGIN_FOR_SPANS_ENABLED=true

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
export DD_CODE_ORIGIN_FOR_SPANS_ENABLED=true
```

{{< /beta-callout >}}

## Overview

Code Origins captures the exact location in your codebase where APM spans are created. When enabled, it automatically adds file path, line number, and function name to each span, making it easier to:

- Debug performance issues
- Understand code execution flow
- Identify performance bottlenecks
- Onboard new team members

{{< img src="tracing/guide/code_origins/code_origin_details.png" alt="Code Origin Details" style="width:100%;">}}

## Getting started

### Prerequisites
- [Datadog APM][6] configured to capture spans
- Service meets the [Compatibility Requirements](#compatibility-requirements) below
- [Source Code Integration][7] enabled (recommended for code previews)

### Compatibility requirements

| Runtime Language | Tracing Library Version | Frameworks |
|---|---|---|
| Java | `1.47.0` or later | Spring Boot/Data, gRPC servers, Micronaut 4, Kafka consumers|
| Python | `2.15.0` or later | Django, Flask, Starlette and derivatives|

> | Node.js | `4.49.0` or later | Fastify (Express is coming soon!) |

Author: @watson I updated the compatibility requirements for Node.js to exclude support for exit spans for now. Can you confirm if this looks correct? (incl. tracer version)

{{< /beta-callout >}}

## Overview

Code Origins captures the exact locations in your codebase where APM spans are created. When enabled, it automatically adds file path, line number, and function name to each span, making it easier to:

- Debug performance issues
- Understand code execution flow
- Identify performance bottlenecks

In Trace Explorer, select a span to see Code Origin details on the Overview tab:
{{< img src="tracing/guide/code_origins/code_origin_details_spotlight.png" alt="Code Origin Details" style="width:100%;">}}

## Getting started

### Prerequisites
- [Datadog APM][6] is configured to capture spans.
- [Source Code Integration][7] is enabled (recommended for code previews).
- Your service meets the [compatibility requirements](#compatibility-requirements).

### Compatibility requirements

| Runtime Language | Tracing Library Version | Frameworks |
|---|---|---|
| Java | 1.47.0+ | Spring Boot/Data, gRPC servers, Micronaut 4, Kafka consumers (entry spans only)|
| Python | 2.15.0+ | Django, Flask, Starlette and derivatives (entry and exit spans)|
| Node.js | 4.49.0+ | Fastify (entry and exit spans), all other [APM-supported integrations][8] (exit spans only)|

> | .NET | 3.15.0+ | ASP.NET, ASP.NET Core (entry and exit spans)| 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| .NET | 3.15.0+ | ASP.NET, ASP.NET Core (entry spans only)| 
```

Reviewer 3: See release notes for reference https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-dotnet/releases

Author: @OmerRaviv I got confirmation from Matan last week that .NET supports both entry and exit! [Slack thread](https://dd.slack.com/archives/G01AQ0HN9C3/p1744750280167169)

Author: Just spoke with @OmerRaviv and we believe exit spans are disabled for .NET at this time. Will confirm with Matan offline!

### Enable Code Origins

> Run your service with the below environment variable:

Author: For this one, I think we should keep it closer to the original instruction. The key is that they are including that env variable when they run their service, but depending on the language and configuration setup, it might not be run as a command per se.

> Run your service with the below environment variable:

Reviewer 4: Totally fair. In that case, let's just switch to "the following environment variable"? We try to avoid directional terms in the docs!

```shell
export DD_CODE_ORIGIN_FOR_SPANS_ENABLED=true
```

## Using Code Origins

### In the Trace Explorer

> 1. Navigate to the [Trace Explorer][1].

Author: Was there meant to be a suggested code change here?

2. Click on any trace to view its details.

> 3. In the span details panel, look for the "Code Origin" section.

Reviewer 5: (nit picky) Shouldn't it say "...look for the "Code Origin" section in the **Overview** tab" ?

Author: I didn't include that detail on purpose, because there is some discussion with the APM traces team about whether it will be moved to another tab!

    {{< img src="tracing/guide/code_origins/code_origin_details_spotlight.png" alt="Code Origin Details in Traces Explorer" style="width:100%;">}}

4. Optionally, click on source code variables to add them as attributes to future spans with [Dynamic Instrumentation][5].
  
    {{< img src="tracing/guide/code_origins/code_origin_add_span_tag_spotlight.png" alt="Code Origin - Add span tag with Dynamic Instrumentation" style="width:100%;">}}  

> ### In your IDE

Reviewer 3: We should specify which IDEs here - I believe right now this only works in IntelliJ? Maybe also WebStorm?

Author: @OmerRaviv I actually purposefully removed the specific IDE names so that the IDE Integration pages can be the source of truth for Code Origins support! Wanted to minimize risk of having stale info on our page. But I can add it back if you feel strongly. LMK, otherwise I'll keep as is.

2. View RED metrics (Requests, Errors, and Duration) as inline annotations above your endpoint methods.

    {{< img src="tracing/guide/code_origins/code_origin_ide_details.png" alt="Code Origin Details in IDE" style="width:100%;">}}

## How it works

Code Origins identifies the source code locations where APM spans originate. Code Origin details are captured for two types of spans:

> **Entry spans**: The first method in your application code that handles an incoming request. The APM integration pinpoints the line of code where requests enter your system.

Reviewer 4: Does this make sense? Trying to align "entry span(s)" and "first method(s)" in terms of singular/plural. 

```suggestion
**Entry spans:** These represent the first method(s) in your application code that handle incoming requests. The APM integration pinpoints the line of code where each request enters your system.
```

> **Exit spans**: The exact line of code that makes an outgoing request to a downstream service. The tracer examines the call stack to identify the line where an exit span starts, skipping third-party code.

Reviewer 4: Same thing here. Trying to align singular/plural. Does this make sense? 

```suggestion
**Exit spans:** These represent the lines of code in your application that make outgoing requests to downstream services. The tracer examines the call stack to identify where each exit span originates, skipping third-party code.
```

> <div class="alert alert-info">Note: Some tracing libraries may have slightly different implementations to optimize for performance.</div>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
This seems too vague to be useful - and also might flare up performance concerns from customers needlessly. Instead, maybe we should just say that exit spans are only supported in some runtimes?

Author: @OmerRaviv This note wasn't actually meant to refer to entry/exit span support! It was more of a disclaimer for any tracers that don't do the stack walk method to identify exit spans. 

I can definitely call out the specific tracer libraries that do stack walk vs. another method - I just need to know which ones!

My goal is to hit a balance of an acceptable "How it works" explanation without information overload. LMK what you think!

Author: Given decision to exclude mention of exit spans in the docs for now, I'll remove this How it works section as well, since there's not enough additional info it provides without the Exit spans definition.

> ## Impact on performance and billing

Reviewer 3: Does this really deserve its own section? Maybe fold into 'How it works'?

Author: Decided to remove this section altogether for now.

**Performance Impact**: Code Origins adds negligible performance overhead in production environments.

> **Pricing Impact**: While in Preview, Code Origins has no impact on billing. Any changes related to Code Origins that have an impact on pricing will be communicated before going into effect.

Reviewer 3: This seems like to much of a deterrent - can we make a decision now about whether we want to charge for it or no now, and then either alter or delete this text? My concern is that we will scare aware customers now, for the vague concern that we *might* want to charge for it later.
```suggestion.
```

Author: @OmerRaviv From on my conversation with Antoine, he is against making this a forever-free feature, given that the extra CO metadata could double or triple the # bytes for a given span ([example](https://dd.datad0g.com/api/ui/trace/67f7c0e500000000a447c60608e74052)) and DD has to eat the cost if we don't charge for that extra data.

I'd argue that customers would be more hesitant to enable it if we say nothing about how it will impact their billing.

I could revise the second sentence to give a bit more comfort around the ability to opt-out once it goes into GA.

Author: Spoke with @OmerRaviv and we're going to remove this section for now until we have more final answers about exit spans/billing implications.

> **Pricing Impact**: While in Preview, Code Origins has no impact on billing. Any changes related to Code Origins that have an impact on pricing will be communicated before going into effect.

Author: Removed this section in latest version.

## Troubleshooting

If Code Origin information is missing:

1. Verify Code Origins is [enabled](#enable-code-origins) in your tracing library configuration.
1. Confirm that your service meets all [compatibility requirements](#compatibility-requirements).
    - In particular, check whether your service's language and framework support Code Origins for entry and/or exit spans.

> 1. Filter for spans that include Code Origins using the query `@_dd.code_origin.type:* in the [Trace Explorer][1].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Filter for spans that include Code Origins using the query `@_dd.code_origin.type:*` in the [Trace Explorer][1].
```

> 1. Enable [Source Code Integration][7] to see code previews in the APM Trace details.

Reviewer 5: Why all of these numbered as 1 ?

> 1. Enable [Source Code Integration][7] to see code previews in the APM Trace details.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Enable [Source Code Integration][7] to see code previews in the APM Trace side panel.
```

> **Note**: Code Origins does not capture third-party code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Potentially too confusing.

Author: Agree!

---
title: Code Origins for Spans
description: "Learn how to use Code Origins to understand where your spans originate from in your codebase"
further_reading:
- link: "/tracing/glossary/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about APM terms and concepts"
- link: "/tracing/trace_collection/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn how to set up APM tracing with your application"
- link: "/tracing/services/service_page/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn more about services in Datadog"
- link: "/tracing/services/resource_page/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Dive into your resource performance and traces"
- link: "/dynamic_instrumentation/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn how to add custom spans with Dynamic Instrumentation"

---

## Overview

> Code Origins is a feature that helps you understand where your APM spans originate from in your codebase. When enabled, it automatically captures the file path, line number, and function name where each span was created, giving you deeper visibility into your application's execution flow.
> 
> This information is particularly valuable when:
> - Debugging performance issues
> - Understanding which parts of your code are being executed
> - Identifying hot spots in your application
> - Onboarding new team members to your codebase

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Code Origins captures the exact location in your codebase where APM spans are created. When enabled, it automatically adds file path, line number, and function name to each span, making it easier to:

- Debug performance issues
- Understand code execution flow
- Identify performance bottlenecks
- Onboard new team members
```

{{< img src="tracing/guide/code_origins/code_origin_details.png" alt="Code Origin Details" style="width:100%;">}}

## Getting started

### Prerequisites

> - Set up [Datadog APM][6] to capture spans and view them in the Traces Explorer.
> - Service must meet the [Compatibility Requirements](#compatibility-requirements) below.
> - (Recommended) For the best experience, enable [Source Code Integration][7] to see Code Origin application code previews.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Datadog APM][6] configured to capture spans
- Service meets the [Compatibility Requirements](#compatibility-requirements) below
- [Source Code Integration][7] enabled (recommended for code previews)
```

### Compatibility requirements

| Runtime Language | Tracing Library Version | Frameworks |
|---|---|---|
| Java | `1.47.0` or later | Spring Boot/Data, gRPC servers, Micronaut 4, Kafka consumers (entry spans only)|
| Python | `2.15.0` or later | Django, Flask, Starlette and derivatives (entry spans only)|
| Node.js | `4.49.0` or later | Fastify (supports both entry & exit spans), All other [APM-supported integrations][8] (support exit spans only)|

### Enable Code Origins

> You can enable Code Origins through environment variables or Datadog tracing library configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable Code Origins through environment variables or tracing library configuration:
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}

<div class="alert alert-info"><a href="/tracing/trace_collection/automatic_instrumentation/dd_libraries/java/">Java tracing library</a> version 1.47.0 or later is required. Spring Boot/Data, gRPC servers, Micronaut 4, and Kafka consumers are supported.</div>

```java
import datadog.trace.api.DDTrace;

// Enable/disable Code Origins

> DDTrace.enableCodeOrigins();

Reviewer: Where did this come from?  I can't find any trace (pun intended) of this type in `dd-trace-java`.

Author: Yep this was definitely made up by Cursor! I'll swap it out with the JVM flag instructions.

```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Python" %}}

<div class="alert alert-info"><a href="/tracing/trace_collection/automatic_instrumentation/dd_libraries/python/">Python tracing library</a> version 2.15.0 or later is required. Django, Flask, and Starlette (and Starlette derivatives) are supported.</div>

```python
import ddtrace

# Enable/disable Code Origins
ddtrace.config.code_origins.enabled = True
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Node.js" %}}

<div class="alert alert-info"><a href="/tracing/trace_collection/automatic_instrumentation/dd_libraries/nodejs/">Node.js tracing library</a> version 4.49.0 or later is required. Both Entry and exit spans are supported on Fastify apps; Only exit spans are supported for all other apps.</div>

```javascript
const tracer = require('dd-trace').init();

// Enable/disable Code Origins
tracer.enableCodeOrigins();
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Environment Variables" %}}

```bash
# Enable/disable Code Origins

> DD_TRACE_CODE_ORIGINS_ENABLED=true

Reviewer: at least in the java tracer, this was renamed to DD_CODE_ORIGIN_FOR_SPANS_ENABLED.  Alternately, the flag `-Ddd.code.origin.for.spans.enabled=true` can be passed to the JVM at start up.

Author: Will update!

Author: Decided to remove the language-specific instructions and keep the environment variable instructions only - for simplicity!

```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Using Code Origins

### In the Trace Explorer

1. Navigate to the [Trace Explorer][1].
2. Click on any trace to view its details.
3. In the span details panel, look for the "Code Origin" section.
4. Optionally, click on variables referenced the source code to add them as attributes on future spans using [Dynamic Instrumentation][5].

{{< img src="tracing/guide/code_origins/code_origin_traces_explorer.png" alt="Code Origin in Traces Explorer" style="width:100%;">}}

### In your IDE

1. Set up your [Datadog IDE Integration][4].
2. See RED metrics as code annotations above your endpoint methods.
3. Quickly navigate to the code location of a given APM span visible from your IDE. 

<div class="alert alert-info">Supported IDEs: JetBrains, Visual Studio Code</div>

{{< img src="tracing/guide/code_origins/code_origin_ide_details.png" alt="Code Origin Details in IDE" style="width:100%;">}}

## How it works

> **Entry spans**: The Code Origin is the first method in the application code that handles the incoming request. When a service is [instrumented][6], we use the APM integration metadata to identify the source code location where incoming requests enter the system.
> 
> **Exit spans**: The Code Origin is the specific line of code that made the outgoing request to a downstream service/component. By examining the call stack, we can identify the line of code where an exit span starts, instrument that line, and decorate the span accordingly. Third-party code is skipped when walking the call stack. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Code Origins captures two types of spans:

**Entry spans**: Shows the first method in your application code that handles an incoming request. The APM integration identifies the source code location where requests enter your system.

**Exit spans**: Shows the exact line of code that makes an outgoing request to a downstream service. The tracer examines the call stack to identify the line where an exit span starts, skipping third-party code.
```

Code Origins identifies the source code locations where APM spans originate. Code Origin details are captured for two types of spans:

> **Entry spans:** These represent the first method(s) in your application code that handle incoming requests. The APM integration pinpoints the line of code where each request enters your system.

Reviewer: These two sentences are basically saying the same thing but in different words.  They're also a bit repetitive.

Author: @evanchooly I don't disagree! But in an effort to explain "how it works" at a high-level, is there a better way you can think of to describe this?

Author: Customer questions about how our products work are really common actually - which is why I actually wanted to include this section.

From my limited experience so far, understanding the "how it works" is often a prerequisite for customers enabling the feature at all.

I'd like to have this section in the docs that we can at least link to, and we can improve the content as we get feedback from customers.

> **Exit spans:** These represent the lines of code in your application that make outgoing requests to downstream services. The tracer examines the call stack to identify where each exit span originates, skipping third-party code.

Reviewer: mentioning the stack walking is an implementation detail that's unnecessary and I'm not sure it's 100% applicable across all tracers.

Author: @evanchooly This is true, but we do have a note below as a disclaimer that some tracing libraries may have slightly different implementations. The goal for this "How it works" section is to give a little more context for curious users without information overload. I'm open to wording changes if you have suggestions!
